---
title: An OP-ED about space security policy
---
International powers expand outer space national security by further weaponizing the void. This security dilemma of potentially an additional battlefield can be solved by creating (binding) rules. I will discuss the challenges of the international community for feasible space control as the topic is politicized, focussing on two of the criteria for arms control agreements: confidence-building and verification. I argue that the former can be achieved focusing on the latter.

As Russia and China outlined in the CD draft treaty on the Prevention of the Placement of Weapons in Space, the Threat or Use of Force Against Space Objects (PPWT), there exist ways of verifying rules such as Pre-launch visits, On-orbit verification, Re-entry verification. 
But among others, the EU also uses civilian space technology for military uses e.g. GMES. The dual-use nature, e.g. the growing dependence on satellites from a civil and military perspective, the vulnerability of satellites and the testing of destructive, debris-generating, ASAT devices pose difficulties to the prevention of space arms races as they constrain the realm for verification.
Verification, which can significantly reduce risk for all parties involved, presumes a willingness to share information - albeit new verification mechanisms can reduce the risk of sharing information. As the UN have shown in their annual reviews, not a single country has to date shared vital information about space objects.
Instead of publicly disclosing the capabilities and location of one’s objects, an arms control treaty should establish an independent agency verifying the information. Similar to the Trilateral Initiative, an information barrier must be established, so that only binary information (pass/fail) are disclosed. The agency purview would not extend to verifying whether objects are actually dual-use space weapons, as this could be seen as a threat to some signatories's perceived space deterrence.

This verification mechanism can complement the feedback of the First Committee (Disarmament and International Security) at the United Nations with regard to the draft treaty proposed by China and Russia. Among others, Australia and the United Kingdom at the UN voiced objections against the proposal as this form of governance does not restrict the development of terrestrial and dual‑use counter‑space systems - a governance challenge for the international community because of the dual-use nature and the reluctance to share information. A legally binding treaty which introduces unpublished and secret verification mechanisms can be able to include terrestrial technology which is not a clear cut space weapon but can be misused as it reduces competitiveness and national security concerns.

Lastly, confidence-building measures including cooperation have been proposed by the EU and security literature. The role of cooperation in preventing arms races looks to be narrow, and this trend grew stronger with the United States’ recent confirmation that they did not intend to cooperate with China in outer space. Nonetheless, in 2017 a UN resolution (PAROS) (Res. 36/97C) was passed with the goal of creating trust and confidence-building in space.
Trust strategies are compelled to be simple as the “space club” is multipolar and divided. Negotiation and implementation of easier mechanisms of sharing information can also lead to more confidence between states.
